sissies are like siblings in a large
polygamous family each one has a unique
personality and is headed in a distinct
direction but they all have somewhat
shared origins sometimes I think
post-colonial cities are like the
children of the two least favorite wives
who are constantly being asked why can't
you be more like your sister the why of
cities is largely the same no matter
where they are an advantageous location
and makes trade and administration
possible the potential for scalable
opportunities for the skilled and
unskilled alike a popular willingness to
be in constant flux and of course
resilience the howl of cities however is
a whole other story how are they run how
do they grow how do they decide who
belongs and who doesn't Lagos is my home
you can always find the Nigerians by
following the noise and the dancing
price like any major city that place is
a lot of things many of which are highly
contradictory our public transportation
doesn't quite work so we have these
privately owned bright yellow buses that
regularly cause accidents luxury car
showrooms lying badly maintained and
often flooded roads Street evangelism is
only slightly less ubiquitous than
street harassment sex workers sometimes
have two degrees a bank job and a
prominent role in church on any given
day they can be either a party or a
burned body in the middle of a street
there is so much that is possible in
Lagos and so much that isn't and very
often the difference between possibility
and impossibility is simply who you are
and if you're lucky enough who you're
connected to belonging in Lagos is a
fluid concept determined by ethnic
origin sexual orientation gender but
most visibly and often most violently
class before Nigeria became a country
Fisher people from the inland creeks
started to come down the Lagos Lagoon
and established villages along the coast
about 60 years later my grandfather
alluded to adequately Kukui also arrived
in Lagos like me he was an alumnus of
the University of Ibadan a young member
of the educated elite in the
independence era over time he built an
illustrious career as a land surveyor
mapping out now bustling neighborhoods
when they were just waist-high wild
grass he died when I was 9 and by that
time my family liked the families of
those Fisher people knew Legos as home
among the Yoruba we have a saying eco
bully Oh Bali which can be translated to
mean that Lagos will welcome anyone but
that saying is becoming less and less
true many lugosi ins including the
descendants of those Fisher people who
arrived generations before my
grandfather are now being pushed out to
make room for an emergent city that has
been described as the new Dubai you see
Lee Lawson smiles big dreams even in its
leaders and successive governments have
declared aspirations towards a mega city
where poverty does not exist
unfortunately instead of focusing on the
eradication of poverty as you would
expect the strategy of choice focuses on
eliminating the poor last October the
governor announced plans to demolish
every single waterfront settlement in
Lagos there are more than 40 of these
indigenous communities all over the city
with over 300,000 people living in them
Otero Bama a hundred year old fishing
village with a population about
three-quarters that of Monaco and
similar potential for beachfront luxury
was one of the first to be targeted I
first heard over to Dubois May after the
demolition started when I visited in
November 2016 I met Magdalene ie for you
she's a now homeless woman whose surname
means the world is blind Magdalene son
basil was one of over 20 people who were
shot
found or presumed dead in that land-grab
standing outside her shelter I saw the
two white sand football fields were
Basile used to play spread all around us
with ruins of schools churches a primary
health center shops thousands of homes
young children enthusiastically helped
to put up shelters and about 5,000 of
the residents with nowhere else to go
simply stay put and then in April state
security personnel came back this time
declared the community out completely
with beatings bullets and fire as I
speak there are construction crews
preparing or to the women's beaches for
anyone who can afford a multi-million
dollar view the new development is
called periwinkle estates
forced evictions are incredibly violent
and of course unconstitutional and yet
thing happens so often in so many of our
cities because the first thing we are
taught to forget about poor people is
that there are people we believe that a
home is a thing a person absolutely has
a right to unless the person is poor and
the home is built a certain way in a
certain neighborhood but there is no
single definition of the word home after
all what is this long besides on organic
responds to acute housing deficits and
income inequality and what is a shanty
if not a person making a home for
themselves against all odds sums are an
imperfect housing solution but they are
also prime examples of the innovation
adaptability and resilience at the
foundation and the heart of every
functional city you don't need to be the
new Dubai when you're already Lagos
we have our own identity our own rhythm
and as anyone who knows Lagos can tell
you poorly oceans are very often the
source of the city's character without
its poor Lagos would not be known for
its music or its endless energy or even
the fact that you can buy an ice-cold
drink or a puppy through your car window
the conditions that cause us to define
certain neighborhoods as slums can be
effectively improved but not without
recognizing the humanity and the agency
of the people living in them in Lagos
where public goods are rarely publicly
available slum dwellers are often at the
forefront of innovating solutions after
being disconnected from the grid for
months because the power company
couldn't figure out how to collect those
one settlements designed a system that
collectivized remittances and got
everyone cheaper rates into the bargain
another settlement created a reform
program that hires local bad boys as
security they know every trick and every
hideout
so now troublemakers are more likely to
get caught and reported to police and
fewer of the youth end up engaging in
criminal activity yet another settlement
recently completed a flood safe
eco-friendly communal toilet system
models like these are being adopted
across Lagos informal settlements are
incorrectly named as the problem in fact
the real problems are the factors that
create them like the entrenchment of
poverty social exclusion and state
failures when our governments framed
slums as threats in order to justify
violent land grabs of forced evictions
they're counting on those of us who live
in formal housing to tacitly and
ignorantly agree with them rather we
must remind them that governments exist
to serve not only those who build and
live in luxury homes but also those who
clean and garden
our realities may differ but our rights
don't the Lagos State government like
far too many on our continent pays lip
service to ideas of inclusion while
acting as though progress can only be
achieved by the eurasia exploitation and
even elimination of groups it considers
expendable people living with
disabilities who hawk or beg on lego
streets are rounded up extorted and
detained women in low-income
neighborhoods are picked up and charged
with prostitution regardless of what
they actually do for a living
gays citizens are scapegoated to
distract from real political problems
but people like cities are resilient and
no amount of legislation or intimidation
or violence can fully eliminate any of
us prostitutes
women and women who work as prostitutes
still haven't gone extinct despite
centuries of active suppression queer
Africans continue to exist even though
queerness is now criminalized in most
parts of the continent and I'm fairly
certain that poor people don't generally
tend to just disappear because they've
been stripped of everything they have we
are all already here and that question
that answers the question of whether or
not we belong when those fisher people
started to sail down the lagoon in
search of new homes it could not have
occurred to them that the city that
would rise up around them would one day
insist that they do not belong in it I
like to believe that my grandfather in
mapping New Frontiers for Latos was
trying to open it up to make room for
other people to be welcomed by the city
in the same way that he was on my way
here my grandma called me to remind me
how proud she was how proud he and my
mother would have been I am their dreams
come true but there is no reason why
their dreams or mine for that matter are
allowed to come true well those of
others
turned to nightmares unless we forget
the minimum requirement for a dream is a
safe place to lay your head it is too
late now for basel but not for Magdalene
not for the hundreds of thousands the
millions still honor threatened leave us
or any of our cities the world does not
have to remain blind to the suffering
that is created when we deny people's
humanity or even to the incredible
potential for growth that exists when we
recognize and value or contributions we
must hold our governments and ourselves
accountable for keeping our shared
cities safe for everyone in them because
the only cities worth building indeed
the only futures who are streaming of
others that include all of us no matter
who we are or how we make homes for
ourselves thank you
[Applause]
you